AllightSykes recently donated 14 1306 Perkins Engines and components to South Regional TAFE, WA, for the training and up-skilling of students and apprentices of Heavy Vehicle Mobile Plant and Heavy Commercial Vehicle Mechanical Courses. The donation was well received by the college and its students; allowing apprentices to perfect their skills and gain hands-on experience, using the same equipment they will maintain in their own workplaces. The equipment will allow lecturers to train students using the latest technology in emissions, fuel injection and diagnostics, as well as engine adjustments and power generation systems set up. South Regional TAFE Training Manager Rebecca Eades said the donated equipment was an important addition to the program. “We would like to thank AllightSykes for their generosity. It’s exciting for our lecturers to be able to teach, practise and access real-world relevant equipment and to see our apprentices maintaining engines used by the heavy mechanical industry across Australia.” The equipment will be repaired and tested by TAFE technicians and lecturers and should be ready for the students to use before the end of the year. “The engines are fantastic. They have new model systems and are a really powerful tool for the students’ learning curve” Said Troy Best, Heavy Automotive Lecturer. “Donations such as this are a great opportunity for us to improve the quality of our teaching and training resources,” completed Troy. Scott Bennett, AllightSykes General Manager of Customer Support said the company was happy to see the engines find a new and noble use. “This industry has an increasing need for skilled professionals, and it is critical for us to have young people coming through with relevant skills and training. TAFE provides the education and environment our industry needs to succeed so it’s our pleasure to give something back.” AllightSykes has donated parts and other equipment’s to TAFE previously as part of its ongoing support and commitment to our industry, as well as education system.