There’s much more to remote visual inspection (RVI) than meets the eye. It’s not as simple as many people think and therefore when it comes to hiring or buying RVI equipment, most people don’t make good decisions. RVI is about actionable results, accuracy, reliability, data collection, decision-making, budgets, project-specific demands, and it is crucial to make informed choices.  However, with people under increasing time pressures, there is a growing trend of renting or buying equipment in a hurry, often over the internet.  This is compounded when they don’t fully understand the limitations of specific remote visual inspection technologies – and can lead to costly delays, longer inspections, inadequate results, greater potential for equipment damage and missed opportunities. So, before you rent or buy any RVI equipment, you should ensure that the item ticks all the boxes necessary for it to deliver the accuracy, precision, repeatability and data collection/analysis that the job requires.  Taking the time up front to investigate and understand your options will be worth it in the long run, and ideally, you should partner with an RVI equipment supplier who has actual field experience in order to get optimum inspection results that meet your specific project needs. To help you find the correct RVI equipment for your application, here are some important criteria that you should discuss with the equipment supplier. Other factors that you need to consider when choosing RVI equipment include: Clearly, there’s far more to remote visual inspection than just the technology and many videoscopes and borescopes have advanced features that need to be understood when selecting remote visual inspection equipment.   It’s also crucial to make sure that the equipment capabilities match that the requirements of the job, so it’s really worthwhile engaging with experienced suppliers who understand the nuances of fieldwork. Nexxis is one such supplier, and with decades of industry experience and a genuine desire to assist clients make the right equipment choice for a specific need, it’s no wonder they are so highly regarded in West Australia.