allmineral, world-renowned specialist in the preparation and processing of gravel, sand, coal and ore, has been awarded the contract to supply a state-of-the-art coal processing plant to Indonesian company SEKAKO Mining for operation in the newly opened 350,000ha coal mining area in central Kalimantan, Borneo.  Custom-designed by allmineral, the heart of the plant is an alljig® F (UB) 5000 x 3400 three-chamber jig, which will sort up to 500t of coal per hour. Grain sizes from 80 – <1mm will be processed, separating tailings from product. The equally reliable and economical alljig® F (UB) 5000 x 3400 initially loosens up the material to be processed by pumping water through it. Air inlets below the settling bed then periodically push air into the chambers, causing the water and material to rise on the setting surface. When the air pressure is released the particles settle depending on their density. The coal rises and then the alljig® separates the heavy material from the layered material bed with a swing bed discharge at the end of the setting surface. The light product is dewatered on a static screen and further transported by vibrating screen. The tailings material is discharged at the end of the third chamber, dewatered by means of a linear screening machine and then conveyed to the tailings pile. The coal washing plant, which was designed with a powerful roller crusher and chain conveyor made by long-standing allmineral partner Hazemag, will efficiently and sustainably save the extracted coal and process it to world market quality.  The allmineral plant works automatically. The discharge for coarse-grained or finely divided material via hydraulically actuated valves is continuously monitored and controlled by measuring, where appropriate, level and consistency. The under-pulsed alljig® three-chamber setting machine is very stable physically, enabling optimum stroke while maintaining minimal energy consumption. In order to be able to serve the demand of the world market, modern processing technology from allmineral, Duisburg is increasingly used for the efficient washing of coking coal in the Kalimantan region. allmineral was supported by its long-standing partners Citec Engineering and HAZEMAG in the realization of the project, which is scheduled to go into operation mid 2019. Indonesia is the world’s largest exporter of thermal coal. Production increased from 246Mt in 2008 to 489Mt in 2013. More than 90% of this coal is exported to China, India and other Asian countries to be used for heating.