We design and manufacture specialised shipping and freight containers suitable for storage and transport of hazardous and non-hazardous cargo. Dry Cargo and Bulk Containers Our specialised dry cargo containers come in many variations to suit varying cargo uses and storage options. Shown below are some of the configurations that we have designed and provided to many customers worldwide. Some common configurations include: Transport and Storage Tank Containers for storage of liquids Our ISO tank containers are predominately manufactured from 316 or 304 stainless-steel and are available in numerous capacities to ship or store a variety of hazardous and non-hazardous liquid materials. These tanks are approved to international ISO standards, are very versatile and can be equipped with insulation, steam heating, electric heating or refrigeration for products that require temperature control. Top and/or bottom discharge options, protective linings and other modifications. Products stored or transported by these containers vary from Food grade products non-hazardous and hazardous chemicals. Container Options’ range of ISO tanks offer benefits such as: Bunded Tank Containers Our range of self-bunded tank containers are double skinned eliminating the requirement for external bunding, we have models which are suitable for transport and/or long and short-term above ground storage of hydrocarbons, including fuels and lubricants. All are containerised for intermodal transport and convenient relocation and come in a range of sizes from 10kl to 100kl. Our range of tanks has the following features: We also supply special purpose self-bunded tanks, including: Bitumen Tank Containers Our Bitumen tank containers are used for the transport and storage of bitumen emulsions, PMBs and heavy fuel oils. They maximise product-carrying capacity within the constraints of a standard ISO shipping slot space. Bitumen thanks are ideal for temporary storage depots and job sites. Flat Rack Platforms and Bases Available in 20ft and 40ft flat racks are available in numerous configurations with fixed and collapsible end walls. Open Top Containers Available with soft or hard top roof, pneumatically opening hatches. Open Top Containers are great for bulk cargo and over height cargo.